>> A flurry of new research has
been pointing to one nerve that
may just be the key to
true health and well-being.
This is "Gaia News."
The vagus, which comes from
the Latin word for wandering,
is the longest and most complex
nerve in the human body,
traveling from the brainstem
all the way down to the colon.
Dr. Donese Worden is a
naturopathic medical doctor
who has been closely
following the research.
>> The vagus nerve is like
an information superhighway.
And it goes back and forth
from the brain to the organs,
and now we know it
also communicates
with the microbiome.
It specifically really
works on talking
to the heart, the lungs,
the gut, and the brain.
And the feedback goes both ways.
So when we're upset about
something, if you feel hungry,
you're short of breath,
your heart is beating fast,
it's because of that
information traveling
back up to the brain
from the nervous system
saying something--
something is up
and we need to take care of it.
It's a smart
communication system.
When we talk about
a gut reaction
or a visceral
reaction, it's really
that reaction coming from the
signals from the vagus nerve.
>> Research is showing that the
vagus nerve exerts its greatest
function through its critical
role in the parasympathetic
nervous system.
>> The parasympathetic
is the rest and digest.
That's the good one.
That's the part that activates
us to really repair the body.
And when we increase that vagal
activity and the vagal tone,
our parasympathetic rest and
digest nervous system kicks in
and we relax and
the body knows how
to heal itself in that state.
>> The vagus has also been
shown to affect numerous other
systems in the body and has been
implicated in various health
conditions.
Experts have linked its
activity to symptoms in people
with inflammatory bowel
disease, epilepsy, arthritis,
depression, anxiety, and
many other common ailments.
>> The vagus nerve has
to do with our emotions,
whether they're
positive or negative.
It has to do with
our immune system,
with our gut microbiome,
which has many implications
in overall health.
It affects our heart,
our brain, and our lungs.
The vagus nerve is like
the homeostatic control
of inflammation in the body.
So if the inflammation is
not shut off from the vagus,
it may become chronic.
>> The most recent research on
the vagus nerve has been done
within the emerging new field
of bioelectronic medicine which
uses electricity to
manage chronic conditions,
often with great success.
The work in this field
has led to the development
of cutting-edge vagus
nerve stimulation devices--
some implanted,
others external--
which have been used in
various neurological disorders.
The FDA has approved
several of these devices
as non-pharmacological
treatments
for brain diseases such as
epilepsy and depression.
>> The vagus nerve is a good
reminder of how electrical
our body really is.
Our body emits
electrical impulses,
and when we put electrical
impulses back in,
it can change many things, from
our brain to our immune system
to our lungs to our gut
health and our emotions, which
include anxiety, depression, and
other mental health conditions.
And that by
manipulating or working
with the electrical
part of our body,
we can help it get back to
homeostasis or to balance.
>> While these stimulation
devices are quite promising,
there are many other ways we
can affect our vagus nerve
functioning without the
involvement of a doctor.
>> Some proven ways
are cold exposure.
And you can look
into cold showers,
putting your face in cold water.
But cold exposure activates
that vagus nerve pathways.
Other ways are deep
and slow breathing.
It's been shown that deep, slow
breathing decreases anxiety.
Why is that?
Because it activates the
vagus nerve system, and that
activates the parasympathetic
nervous system.
Your vagus nerve is
connected to your vocal cords
and the muscles in the
back of your throat.
So singing, humming, gargling,
and chanting actually
help activate and
stimulate your vagus nerve.
>> Other natural ways to
stimulate your vagus nerve
include taking probiotics,
exercising, receiving massage,
and socializing.
Researchers and
practitioners like Dr. Worden
are excited about all
the different ways
in which we can work with this
critical part of our bodies.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]